README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="src/shared/configs/smplos/branding/plymouth/logo.png" alt="smplOS" width="300">
</p>

<h3 align="center">A simple OS that just works.</h3>

<p align="center">
  Minimal &bull; Lightweight &bull; Offline-first &bull; Cross-compositor
</p>

---

## What is smplOS?

smplOS is a minimal Arch Linux distribution built around one idea: **simplicity**.

It draws inspiration from projects like [Omarchy](https://omakub.org/) but takes a different path. Where others ship opinions, smplOS ships sensible defaults that stay out of your way. No bloat, no decisions made for you — just a clean, fast, good-looking system that works the moment you boot it.

### Why smplOS?

- **Lightweight.** Under 850 MB of RAM on a cold boot. Every package earns its place.
- **Fast installs.** Fully offline — no internet required. A fresh install completes in under 2 minutes.
- **Cross-compositor.** Built from the ground up to support multiple compositors. Hyprland (Wayland) ships first, DWM (X11) is next. Shared configs, shared themes, shared keybindings — the compositor is just a thin layer.
- **One UI toolkit.** EWW powers the bar, widgets, and dialogs. It runs on both X11 and Wayland. No waybar, no polybar, no redundant tools.
- **14 built-in themes.** One command switches colors across the entire system — terminal, bar, notifications, borders, lock screen, and editor.

### Editions

smplOS ships in focused editions, each adding curated tools on top of the same minimal base:

| Edition | Focus | Example apps |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| **Lite** | Minimal base | Browser, terminal, file manager |
| **Creators** | Design & media | GIMP, OBS, Kdenlive, Inkscape |
| **Productivity** | Office & workflow | LibreOffice, Thunderbird, Obsidian |
| **Communication** | Chat & calls | Discord, Signal, Slack |

Every edition installs offline, in under 2 minutes, from the same ISO.

---

## Architecture

smplOS separates shared infrastructure from compositor-specific configuration. The goal is maximum code reuse — compositors are a thin layer on top of a shared foundation.

```
src/
  shared/              Everything here works on ALL compositors
    bin/               User-facing scripts (installed to /usr/local/bin/)
    eww/               EWW bar and widgets (GTK3 -- works on X11 + Wayland)
    configs/smplos/    Cross-compositor configs (bindings.conf, branding)
    themes/            14 themes with templates for all apps
    installer/         OS installer
    settings-panel/    System settings
  compositors/
    hyprland/          Hyprland-specific config (hypr/, st-wl terminal)
    dwm/               DWM-specific config (st terminal, future)
  editions/            Edition-specific package lists and post-install scripts
  builder/             ISO build pipeline
  iso/                 ISO resources (boot entries, offline repo)
release/               VM testing tools (dev-push, test-iso, QEMU scripts)
```

## Design Principles

- **Simple over opinionated.** Provide good defaults, not forced workflows.
- **Cross-compositor first.** Every feature must work across Hyprland (Wayland) and DWM (X11). Compositor-specific code stays in `src/compositors/<name>/`.
- **EWW is the UI layer.** Bar, widgets, dialogs — all EWW. It runs on both GTK3/X11 and GTK3/Wayland.
- **One theme system.** `theme-set` applies colors to EWW, terminals, btop, notifications, compositor borders, lock screen, and neovim.
- **bindings.conf is the single source of truth** for keybindings across all compositors.
- **Minimal packages.** One terminal, one launcher, one bar. No redundant tools.
- **Offline-first.** The ISO carries everything needed. No downloads during install.

## Compositors

| Compositor | Display Server | Terminal | Status |
|------------|---------------|----------|--------|
| Hyprland   | Wayland       | st-wl    | Active |
| DWM        | X11           | st       | Planned |

## Building

### ISO

```bash
cd src && ./build-iso.sh
```

This produces a bootable Arch Linux ISO with smplOS pre-configured. Takes ~15 minutes.

### Development Iteration

For config/script changes, avoid full ISO rebuilds:

```bash
# Host: push changes to VM shared folder
cd release && ./dev-push.sh eww    # or: bin, hypr, themes, all

# VM: apply changes to the live system
sudo bash /mnt/dev-apply.sh
```

### VM Testing

```bash
cd release && ./test-iso.sh
```

## Themes

14 built-in themes, each providing colors for all UI components:

Catppuccin Mocha, Catppuccin Latte, Dracula, Gruvbox Dark, Gruvbox Light, Nord, One Dark, Rose Pine, Rose Pine Dawn, Solarized Dark, Solarized Light, Sweet, Tokyo Night, Tokyo Night Light.

## License

MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

Terminal emulators (st, st-wl) are under their own licenses — see their respective directories.

Commit message:

docs: add design decisions and theme picker keybinding

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="src/shared/configs/smplos/branding/plymouth/logo.png" alt="smplOS" width="300">
</p>

<h3 align="center">A simple OS that just works.</h3>

<p align="center">
  Minimal &bull; Lightweight &bull; Offline-first &bull; Cross-compositor
</p>

---

## What is smplOS?

smplOS is a minimal Arch Linux distribution built around one idea: **simplicity**.

It draws inspiration from projects like [Omarchy](https://omakub.org/) but takes a different path. Where others ship opinions, smplOS ships sensible defaults that stay out of your way. No bloat, no decisions made for you — just a clean, fast, good-looking system that works the moment you boot it.

### Why smplOS?

- **Lightweight.** Under 850 MB of RAM on a cold boot. Every package earns its place.
- **Fast installs.** Fully offline — no internet required. A fresh install completes in under 2 minutes.
- **Cross-compositor.** Built from the ground up to support multiple compositors. Hyprland (Wayland) ships first, DWM (X11) is next. Shared configs, shared themes, shared keybindings — the compositor is just a thin layer.
- **One UI toolkit.** EWW powers the bar, widgets, and dialogs. It runs on both X11 and Wayland. No waybar, no polybar, no redundant tools.
- **14 built-in themes.** One command switches colors across the entire system — terminal, bar, notifications, borders, lock screen, and editor.

### Design Decisions

Every tool in smplOS was chosen to work across compositors — Wayland and X11 — so the OS feels identical regardless of which one you run.

| Component | Choice | Why |
|-----------|--------|-----|
| **Bar & widgets** | EWW | GTK3-based — runs natively on both X11 and Wayland. One codebase for bar, launcher, theme picker, and keybind help. Replaces waybar, polybar, and rofi. |
| **Launcher** | Rofi | Wayland fork (lbonn/rofi) and X11 original share the same config format and theming. One theme file, two backends. |
| **Terminal** | st / st-wl | Suckless st has an X11 build and a Wayland port (marchaesen/st-wl). Same config.h, same patches, same look. Starts in ~5ms and uses ~4 MB of RAM — critical for staying under the 850 MB cold-boot target. |
| **Notifications** | Dunst | Works on both X11 and Wayland with the same config. Lightweight, themeable, no dependencies on a specific compositor. |

The rule is simple: if a tool only works on one display server, it doesn't ship in `src/shared/`. Compositor-specific code stays in `src/compositors/<name>/` and is kept as thin as possible.

### Editions

smplOS ships in focused editions, each adding curated tools on top of the same minimal base:

| Edition | Focus | Example apps |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| **Lite** | Minimal base | Browser, terminal, file manager |
| **Creators** | Design & media | GIMP, OBS, Kdenlive, Inkscape |
| **Productivity** | Office & workflow | LibreOffice, Thunderbird, Obsidian |
| **Communication** | Chat & calls | Discord, Signal, Slack |

Every edition installs offline, in under 2 minutes, from the same ISO.

---

## Architecture

smplOS separates shared infrastructure from compositor-specific configuration. The goal is maximum code reuse — compositors are a thin layer on top of a shared foundation.

```
src/
  shared/              Everything here works on ALL compositors
    bin/               User-facing scripts (installed to /usr/local/bin/)
    eww/               EWW bar and widgets (GTK3 -- works on X11 + Wayland)
    configs/smplos/    Cross-compositor configs (bindings.conf, branding)
    themes/            14 themes with templates for all apps
    installer/         OS installer
    settings-panel/    System settings
  compositors/
    hyprland/          Hyprland-specific config (hypr/, st-wl terminal)
    dwm/               DWM-specific config (st terminal, future)
  editions/            Edition-specific package lists and post-install scripts
  builder/             ISO build pipeline
  iso/                 ISO resources (boot entries, offline repo)
release/               VM testing tools (dev-push, test-iso, QEMU scripts)
```

## Design Principles

- **Simple over opinionated.** Provide good defaults, not forced workflows.
- **Cross-compositor first.** Every feature must work across Hyprland (Wayland) and DWM (X11). Compositor-specific code stays in `src/compositors/<name>/`.
- **EWW is the UI layer.** Bar, widgets, dialogs — all EWW. It runs on both GTK3/X11 and GTK3/Wayland.
- **One theme system.** `theme-set` applies colors to EWW, terminals, btop, notifications, compositor borders, lock screen, and neovim.
- **bindings.conf is the single source of truth** for keybindings across all compositors.
- **Minimal packages.** One terminal, one launcher, one bar. No redundant tools.
- **Offline-first.** The ISO carries everything needed. No downloads during install.

## Compositors

| Compositor | Display Server | Terminal | Status |
|------------|---------------|----------|--------|
| Hyprland   | Wayland       | st-wl    | Active |
| DWM        | X11           | st       | Planned |

## Building

### ISO

```bash
cd src && ./build-iso.sh
```

This produces a bootable Arch Linux ISO with smplOS pre-configured. Takes ~15 minutes.

### Development Iteration

For config/script changes, avoid full ISO rebuilds:

```bash
# Host: push changes to VM shared folder
cd release && ./dev-push.sh eww    # or: bin, hypr, themes, all

# VM: apply changes to the live system
sudo bash /mnt/dev-apply.sh
```

### VM Testing

```bash
cd release && ./test-iso.sh
```

## Themes

14 built-in themes, each providing colors for all UI components.

Press <kbd>META</kbd> + <kbd>SHIFT</kbd> + <kbd>T</kbd> to open the theme picker and switch instantly.

Catppuccin Mocha, Catppuccin Latte, Dracula, Gruvbox Dark, Gruvbox Light, Nord, One Dark, Rose Pine, Rose Pine Dawn, Solarized Dark, Solarized Light, Sweet, Tokyo Night, Tokyo Night Light.

## License

MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

Terminal emulators (st, st-wl) are under their own licenses — see their respective directories.
